Clients can send GOAWAY too (#3129)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-http.md

## Connection Shutdown

Even when a connection is not idle, either endpoint can decide to stop using the
connection and initiate a graceful connection close.  Endpoints initiate the
graceful shutdown of a connection by sending a GOAWAY frame ({{frame-goaway}}).
The GOAWAY frame contains an identifier that indicates to the receiver the range
of requests or pushes that were or might be processed in this connection.  The
server sends a client-initiated bidirectional Stream ID; the client sends a Push
ID.  Requests or pushes with the indicated identifier or greater are rejected by
the sender of the GOAWAY.  This identifier MAY be zero if no requests or pushes
were processed.

The information in the GOAWAY enables a client and server to agree on which
requests or pushes were accepted prior to the connection shutdown.  Endpoints
SHOULD abruptly terminate any requests or pushes that have identifiers greater

> than or equal to the smallest identifier sent in a GOAWAY frame.

Reviewer: I think we can remove this sentence, as we talk more specifically in the sentence starting from line 708 (i.e. "It is RECOMMENDED that the receiving endpoint explicitly reject such requests (see {{request-cancellation}}) or pushes (see {{frame-cancel-push}}) in order to clean up transport state for the affected streams."), and because the abstract is already given in the sentence starting from line 690 (i.e. "Requests or pushes with the indicated identifier or greater are rejected by the sender of the GOAWAY.").

Reviewer 2: This is talking about the sending endpoint, though.  I've received requests A-G; I'm sending a GOAWAY indicating that I've done some non-zero amount of processing up through C.  I send a GOAWAY indicating that D and higher haven't been processed, then SHOULD send RESET_STREAMs for D, E, F, and G to keep the transport state consistent.

Reviewer: > This is talking about the sending endpoint, though.

That's true, and I now notice that the sentence starting from line 708 is the one that's incorrect.

The paragraph starting from line 703 talks about what to do with messages that were already in transit. It is a generalization of an exiting paragraph, that states that the sender of GOAWAY SHOULD reset, the receiver of GOAWAY MAY. I assume that we want to retain those behaviors.

The second sentence of that paragraph that talks about the receiver is correct (i.e. "If the endpoint has already sent requests or pushes with an identifier greater than or equal to that received in a GOAWAY frame, those requests or pushes will not be processed"). Next sentence that starts from 708 should then talk about the sender, but it incorrectly states: _It is RECOMMENDED that the **receiving** endpoint explicitly reject such requests._

I think it is beneficial to retain a paragraph that concentrates on handling of the HTTP messages in transit, and therefore still think that removing this paragraph (starting from line 694) is the correct thing to do, _and also fixing the "receiving" in the sentence starting from line 708 to "sending."

Reviewer 2: I think the confusing piece here is that the sender of the GOAWAY is the receiver of the in-flight request/push.  This means to talk about the receipt of the request, but makes it sound like it's talking about the receiver of the GOAWAY.

I'm not sure we need to eliminate any paragraphs, but clarifying the terms would probably help a lot.  This section could previously rely on "client" and "server" to clearly imply who's doing what with requests and GOAWAY frames; now it's generalized and easy to lose track of the involved parties.

Reviewer 2: @kazuho, I've updated the text around both statements to try to make this clearer.  Can you take a look at 3f93d362?

Reviewer: Thank you for all the work (including merging the changes from master). Looks good to me now.

Endpoints MUST NOT initiate new requests or pushes on the connection with an
identifier greater than or equal to the smallest identifier received in a GOAWAY
frame.  Clients MAY establish a new connection to send additional requests.

Some requests or pushes might already be in transit. If the endpoint has already
sent requests or pushes with an identifier greater than or equal to that
received in a GOAWAY frame, those requests or pushes will not be processed;
requests MAY be retried by the client on a different connection.  The endpoint
that initiated these requests or pushes MAY cancel them.  It is RECOMMENDED that

> the receiving endpoint explicitly reject such requests (see

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
such requests be explicitly rejected (see
```

> {{request-cancellation}}) or pushes (see {{frame-cancel-push}}) in order to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{request-cancellation}} and {{frame-cancel-push}}) upon receipt in order to
```

server sends a client-initiated bidirectional Stream ID; the client sends a Push
ID.  Requests or pushes with the indicated identifier or greater are rejected by
the sender of the GOAWAY.  This identifier MAY be zero if no requests or pushes
were processed.

The information in the GOAWAY frame enables a client and server to agree on
which requests or pushes were accepted prior to the connection shutdown. Upon
sending a GOAWAY frame, the endpoint SHOULD explicitly cancel (see
{{request-cancellation}} and {{frame-cancel-push}}) any requests or pushes that
have identifiers greater than or equal to that indicated, in order to clean up
transport state for the affected streams. The endpoint SHOULD continue to do so
as more requests or pushes arrive.

Endpoints MUST NOT initiate new requests or promise new pushes on the connection
after receipt of a GOAWAY frame from the peer.  Clients MAY establish a new
connection to send additional requests.

Some requests or pushes might already be in transit.  Upon receipt of a GOAWAY
frame, if the endpoint has already sent requests or promised pushes with an
identifier greater than or equal to that received in a GOAWAY frame, those

> requests or pushes will not be processed.  The endpoint that initiated these

Reviewer 2: I wound up separating these further, and in the process maybe breaking up the wall of text this section has become.

> requests or pushes MAY cancel them.  Clients MAY retry such requests on a

Reviewer 2: I reduced the MAY to a "can" and made it a separate paragraph further down.

> different connection.

Reviewer 2: By removing the intervening sentence, this seems like less of a throwaway sentence.  See if you like this flow better?

might have acted on.

A client that is unable to retry requests loses all requests that are in flight
when the server closes the connection.  An endpoint MAY send multiple GOAWAY
frames indicating different identifiers, but MUST NOT increase the identifier
value they send, since clients might already have retried unprocessed requests

> on another connection.

Reviewer 2: Symmetry.  If clients are going to send Push IDs, then I'd rather have the same processing rules in both directions -- even if the reason it really matters only applies to clients.

An endpoint that is attempting to gracefully shut down a connection can send a
GOAWAY frame with a value set to the maximum possible value (2^62-4 for servers,
2^62-1 for clients). This ensures that the peer stops creating new requests or
pushes. After allowing time for any in-flight requests or pushes to arrive, the
endpoint can send another GOAWAY frame indicating which requests or pushes it

> will accept before the end of the connection. This ensures that a connection can

Reviewer 3: Let's not imply any certainty about this.

```suggestion
might accept before the end of the connection. This ensures that a connection can
```
warning: this might be > 80 columns now

### GOAWAY {#frame-goaway}

The GOAWAY frame (type=0x7) is used to initiate graceful shutdown of a
connection by either endpoint.  GOAWAY allows an endpoint to stop accepting new
requests or pushes while still finishing processing of previously received
requests and pushes.  This enables administrative actions, like server
maintenance.  GOAWAY by itself does not close a connection.

~~~~~~~~~~  drawing
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

> |                  Stream ID/Push ID (i)                      ...

Reviewer 4: Sometimes using one ID space and sometimes using the other still seems odd to me, but it's where we're at.

: PING frames do not exist, since QUIC provides equivalent functionality.

GOAWAY (0x7):
: GOAWAY does not contain an error code.  In the client to server direction,

> it carries a Push ID instead of a server initiated stream ID.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  it carries a Push ID instead of a server initiated stream ID.
```
